
Interview questions, loved by some, hated by many. These are often seen as the hardest part of the interview. What do you say? What do you do? What's the "right" answer here?

Interview questions make up 95% of an interview. The whole purpose of an interview is to ask questions and be asked questions. Luckily for you and I, according to Reed, there are only 15 interview questions. All other interview questions stem from these magic 15. 

We only need to know how to answer 20% of the interview questions to answer 80% of all the questions asked of you. The other 20%, well, that should come from your research on the company. Later on in this book, we will discuss how to research a company.

Let's get right into these interview questions.

    Tell me about yourself

Don't make the mistake of thinking this is about your personal life. They do not care about your personal life. It doesn't matter whether you have a dog or a cat. They want to hear your professional life story. 

Make sure to tell a story. Like previously discussed, humans are naturally prone to enjoying stories. Stories make the other person interested. Don't give out a bullet pointed list, talk with them.

This question is a combination of things. How well the candiate has prepared, their confidence, and what they've done in their professional life.

Even if you haven't done something interesting in your professional life, you can spin any story to make it sound amazing. In the world of news, bad stories are often spun into a good light. You can spin something non-interesting into interesting. Let's see an example of this.

Liverpool HackSoc is a new society at the University of Liverpool designed to allow anyone to learn to program. If you are a graphic designer for this society, that sounds okay. But if you say:

"I had the marvelous opportunity to work with Liverpool Hacksoc early on in my carer. We created Liverpool's hacker community akin to Manchester or Sheffield. We taught thousands of people to code, we got many people jobs. My role as graphic designer was to  elucidate  the society and entice people who were probaly never going to learn to program into learning to program."

Anything can be spun to sound amazing. It's all about selling yourself.  Let's use another example.

Let's say you work part-time at McDonalds. I chose this because this is the most mediocre thing I could think of. While working at McDonalds, you discovered that it's faster to type in the order as the person says it rather than to type it at the end. This isn't groundbreaking stuff, just a simple observation. We're going to spin this story to make you sound mind-blowingly amazing.

    In my teenage years I worked at a rapid quickfire fastfood chain. On average, we served around 400 customers an hour and during our peaks the store would get so busy the line would go out the door. In this environment, I learnt that I thrive under extreme amounts of pressue. Not only did I have to make sure that every single customer was over-joyus with their meals but I had to do it fast.


    Whilest working here, I created a new system that increased the speed and accuracy of processing information into an End Point of Sales system. This new system allowed us to serve twice as many customers per minute all whilest keeping the customer satisfaction levels high.


    One time, my store ran out of milk. My manager chose me to partake on this critical mission. To refill our stock supplies and refill them fast. Not only did I achieve this mission within 5 minutes, but I managed to achieve it before any customers requested items containing milk. Considering this restaurent serves 10 people a minute, I'll say that's some achievement. 

The point I'm trying to make here is that no matter how mediocre of a job you think you had, you can always spin it to make you sound amazing.

Okay, back to the question at hand. Businesses have elevator pitches. These are 30 second speeches that describe the business. The idea is if you are in an elevator with an investor, you have around 30 seconds to convince them to invest in the company. People can have elevator pitches too, and this is used to answer this question.

Your elevator pitcher should be customised per job position. Hopefully you'll understand that nearly everything should be customised per job position. I can't tell you what to say, as I don't know you. 

Don't make it sound like someone has never asked this question to you before. Act confident. Practice on your friends or in your mirror. Don't "uhmm" or "ehh" before answering. This makes you look like you haven't prepared, that you're not confident. Look them in the eye, smile, and say it out loud like you've rehearsed it every day of your life. 

Always start your pitch with what you currently do (professionally). End that paragraph with something that leads the interviewer back in time. You want to tell a story. You also want to talk about your most recent things first.

    I'm a computer science student at the University of Liverpool. I'm aiming to get a first class degree. Previously I was studying a level 4 diploma at a local college



The next part leads back into your past. Notice how I ended the first part with "Previous I was". This gently pushes you and the reader back into the past. I'm a student, and the likely chance is that you are a student. Education is the thing that defines us, but if you have any part time jobs working in industry you can put them here. 

If you are a software engineer, you can say something like this:
 

    I'm a computer science student at the University of Liverpool. I'm aiming to get a first class degree. I'm also a software engineer part-time.

Make sure each section smoothly leads into the other.

The second section should talk about your achievements. Don't talk about your responsibillities, what you had to do. Talk about what you have achieved. 

In my case, it'll look like this:

    While at college I became the student union's higher education vice president.  During this role I ran the collective college partnership’s  Student Union consisting of 5 colleges.  Towards the end of my role, every student was filling out the annual student survey. Every section for the student union had improved ten-fold. Most noticcably, the student union satisfaction rating went up from 30% to ~85%. 


    This role required me to be an effective leader and team player. I needed to communicate complex ideas to the board members within meetings. I had to learn to deal with fast paced deadlines and even how to interview and select an appropriate repalcement candiate. I believe all of these skills I have obtained will come in very useful within this job.

Remember earlier when I said it's all about spinning a story? Make sure to include statistics if you can. This section is ripe for you to spin, to make yourself sound amazing. At the time, my job required me to go to a meeting once a month and pop into classrooms to discuss student issues. That doesn't seem like much, but I can spin it to make it sound amazing. Also, the statistics help a lot.

When you end this, you have to make the interview aware that you have finished. With this question, sometimes there is a few awkward seconds of the interviwer wondering "did they finish?"

In my case, I like to end it with:

    If there is anything else you would like to know, feel free to ask me

Most candiates fail this question because they have not practiced. They do not know how to answer or what to talk about. This results in the candiate vomiting out positions and words until they are satisfied that they've covered the question.

Throughout all of these questions in this book, I urge you to practice them. It simply is not enough to read it and forget it, you need to write your own answer to these questions. This question especially. This question is asked in pretty much every interview, and normally right at the start of an interview. Because it's asked at the start, it counts towards your first impression. If you do not answer this question confidently then the interviwer will likely not hire you, even if you answer every other question well.

The interviewer asks this question because it allows them to get a rough idea of your background and experience. Sure, they could read your CV. But the interviewer sees this as an "easy" question and it helps to calm your nerves.

2. Why are you applying?

This question helps the employer understand what you can do for them. You couild rephrase this question as "What can you do that we need you to do?" They want to know what problems you can solve. They want to know if you have the determination and motivation to work for the.

In the Reed book "why you?" they say that an answer to this question can be expressed in one single sentence:

"I'm applying because my skills, experience, and movation are the best fit for the job."

Like all interview questions, you have to customise it per job interview. Don't give out a blanket answer here. Don't mention these in your answer:
* You need money
* You want to get out of the house
* A shorter commute is better than a longer one

You want to work at this job because you love it. Even if you don't love it, don't let the interviewer know. The interviewer wants to hire someone who is in love with the company and the job, don't give them any reason to doubt you.

You want to research the job role here to see how you can fit into the job role. Interviewing is all about making yourself look like the perfect candidate for the job.  Here's an example of an answer to this question:

 I want this job because it emphasizes sales and marketing, two of my  greatest skill sets. In my previous job, I increased sales by 15 percent  in what was at the time considered a flat industry. I know I could  bring my ten years of sales and marketing experience to this company,  and help you continue your years of growth. 

3. What are your greatest strengths?

To answer this question, you have to customise it to the job description. Reflect what the job description says here. It's no use talking about how great you are at welding if you're applying for an office job.

This question is giving you the opportunity to boast about yourself, but don't come across as arrogant. This is not the time to be humble, you need to sell yourself like you're absolutely perfect for the job.

There isn't much I can say here to help you, since this question is customised per job. You need to think about how you'll answer this question and write down your answer.

Instead, let's go over what makes a great answer. Look at this answer:

 
“I’m  an extremely hard worker. I often don’t pick up many projects but when I  do I go all in. Recently I’ve picked up blogging, managing to amass  more than 80,000 monthly readers in less than 8 months.”

The statistics in this answer make it hit hard. 80,000 people read my blog every month, and I've achieved that in 6 months? Notice how I've managed to boast here without sounding too big-headed. You could rephrase this as:

"I've grown my blog to tens of thousands of readers every single month, and it has taken me less than a year!"

This one sounds like I'm obsessed with myself. If you add statistics, you're allowed to boast about yourself without sounding obsessive or insane.

Another way to rephrase this is:

"My blog posts get twice as many people reading them as there are people in Lichtenstein"

This is using statistics. There are around 30,000 people in Lichtenstein and 80,000 people read my blog, but, this sounds big headed. You have to say the numbers directly. Notice how if we change this to include numbers it doesn't make sense:

"My blog posts get 80,000 readers per month. There are 30,000 people in Lichtenstein. My blog gets more than twice as many readers per month than there are people in Lichtenstein".

Statistics and hard numbers are incredibly important.

But make sure the statistic is relevant to the job. If I'm applying for a job that has nothing to do with writing, I probably wouldn't bring this up.

With statistics, you don't have to be given one to use it. You can work out the statistic yourself. Let's say you work in a bookshop and you regularly talk to customers. You could say:

"I regularly engage with customers and sell them more books then what they came in for. On average, every customer I serve buys more than £50 worth of books".

Often times, it's better to present something you're only slightly good at then it is to present something you are amazing at. If the thing you are amazing at doesn't match the job description, don't mention it. If the thing you are slightly good at does, do mention it.

4. What are your greatest weaknesses?

Many people fail this question because they believe that the right answer is "I don't have any weaknesses". What? Are you human? Everyone has a weakness. Please do not answer with a weakness like:


        I’m a hard worker


        I overwork so much


        I obsess with team work

Yeah, sure it may have worked for your grand dad but employers could see the lies from miles away. Use an actual weakness here, something that you suck at. But don't admit to something insane like:

    Sometimes I get really vivid thoughts of murdering people that interview me :)

The secret to answering this question is to use a real problem you've faced. But make sure you talk about how you've overcome this. If you're still overcoming the problem, that's okay. You can still talk about this. An example taken from myself would be:


   “I  used to be terrified of phone calls. The idea of phoning someone was a  no go for me. Having worked in a students union and at multiple events  it was inevitable for me to phone people so I’ve gotten use to it. I’m  still overcoming this but I’m not as bad as I was a year or two ago.”


But  don’t make the weakness a part of the job description. If the job  description says “you need to be really good at talking to people”  never say “I’m really bad at talking to someone”.
Make sure you say how you overcame your weakness and turn it into something positive. Make it into a mini story. 
Make sure  this won’t be a problem at your current company. Say something like “I  believe this won’t be a problem in this company” and then say why. Mine would be:


   “I  used to be terrified of phone calls. The idea of phoning someone was a  no go for me. Having worked in a students union and at multiple events  it was inevitable for me to phone people so I’ve gotten use to it. I’m  still overcoming this but I’m not as bad as I was a year or two ago. I  believe this won’t be a problem at this company because I’m passionate  for the cause of this company which would allow me to talk more on the  phone to people revolving around this company. That’s one of the reasons  I want to join this company, because I get to do what I love and I get  to push my boundaries and get out of my comfort zone, to grow both  personally and professionally.”


Make  it very clear that this question is as normal as giving your name and  address, do not act like they are forcing information out of you. Whatever you do, under all circumstances, NEVER ever EVER reply with any of these:


    I’m a perfectionist!


    I work too hard


    I don’t have any!


    Chocolate / food


5. What will your skills and ideas bring to this company?

To put it bluntly, this question is just:

    Why should we care about you? What can you do that others can’t? 

This is one of the best questions that could possibly come up in an interview. Other ways of phrasing this question are:

"What can you do that others can't?"

The recruiter is asking you to mow down your competition. Do not show mercy to your competition, make it very clear that you are the best. If you've worked on a pre-project, now is the time to talk about it. If you're a software developer you might say something like:

"
    I  saw your company used this Python package on GitHub but that Python  package is deprecated. I’ve actually made a Python package that works  the same but uses all the conventions that Python requires now. It’s  also a little bit faster.
"

You have to customise this per job. There aren't many interview questions that you can't customise per job. Also, you want to beat your components but don't talk badly about them. Focus on your strengths, not your components' weaknesses. You'll want to focus on what you're good at.

If you haven't completed a pre-project, talk about what you've done in the past for other, but similar, companies. Make it sound like these past achievements are something that you can do for this company. An example might be:

 

   “I turned a failing product from 30 sales a month to 10,000 a week, I want to sell as many of Product X as possible”.


Or take this answer from The Balence


    I  will bring my unique vision to your company. I am experienced in the  many areas related to this company’s current goals, including expanding  international sales. For example, I helped improve international sales  at a previous company by over 25%. My sales background, along with my  ability to plan ahead, will help facilitate that growth.


6. What’s your preferred management style?

This question is just the interviewer wanting to know if you are going to get along together.

There’s 3 main steps to this question.


    Define what good management is


They  obviously care about good management, so it’s important that you and  the interviewer get on the same page about what good management is.  Here’s an answer from The Muse


    Management  style is so hard to put your finger on, but I think in general a good  manager gives clear directions and actually stays pretty hands-off, but  is ready and available to jump in to offer guidance, expertise, and help  when needed. I try my best to make that my management style.


2. Add your own take
Now  say something that makes you unique. You want to stand out, not appear  to be another sheep in the candiate pool. Here’s a good response for the  second part from Forbes


    “In  terms of what makes me unique, I also go out of my way to make sure I  know when my team needs help. I don’t hang around and wait to be called  upon by my direct reports — I go to them. That means plenty of informal  check-ins, both on the work they’re doing and on their general job  satisfaction and mental well-being.”


3. Add an example
Examples always work in interview answers. Back up what you’ve said. Here’s an answer to this part, again from The Muse


    I  remember one project in particular at my most recent position where I  supervised seven staff that involved everyone working on a separate  aspect of the product. This meant a lot of independent work for my team,  but rather than bog everyone down with repetitive meetings to update me  and everyone else on progress made, I created a project wiki that  allowed us to communicate new information when necessary without  disrupting another team member’s work. I then made it my job to make  sure no one was ever stuck on a problem too long without a sounding  board.


7. Where do you see yourself in five years’ time?

The recruiter is asking this question because they want to know if you plan to work there for a long time. Every employer expects you to work there for a very long time, even if it's a small part time job. 

Brand loyalty is important here. Even if you don't plan to work there forever, make it seem like it. You can say something along the lines of:


    I  don’t know your company well enough, but I would like to think I would  still be working here. In 5 years time I would have liked to learnt  enough to be able to train people in future roles.

What you want to do here is mix "I love your company and I want to work here forever" with "I'm quite ambitious and I would love to take on some bigger roles in my career".


8. How would you approach this job?

This question is strange. It's kind of a trick question. You will never  completely know how a company works without working at that company.  Don’t answer like you’re an expert on this but you do need to answer  like you have a relatively good idea of what you’re doing.

An answer like this will work:


    Well,  the best way to do this job won’t come clear to me until I start this  job. But I’ll start by getting to know my colleauges and team,  listening, taking notes, building relationships, and helping people out  where I can. After all that, I’ll have a good idea of how to do this job  in the best way possible. At my last job I did…


Notice the example again. Talk about how you best undertook your last job but don’t go on forever about it. You don't need to answer every question with some long winded story. 

9. What have you achieved in other roles?

This is quite similar to question 3. This questions is giving you permission to toot your own horn. This is not the time to be humble. Talk about your proudest achievement at another role. This is highly personal, but an example of mine would be:

"
    My  role as Higher Education Vice President started off on a bad turn.  There were supposed to be 5 student union officers, but only I wanted to  do the job. Effectively leaving me in charge of the work of 5 people,  all whilst the student union staff who work with us had left to go to  another job.


    Luckily  this was perfect for me, as I stepped up when no one else would. I  travelled to every campus as much as possible to make sure all students  were listened to. When a group of students came to me telling me that  their course isn’t being properly funded I demanded a meeting with the  principle of East Kent College to fix this.


    As  well as this I repeatedly represented the students in a democratic way  at both a local (Kent) way and in a national way. I was chosen to attend  the National Union of Student’s National Conference, where I elected  the next NUS officer team and chose to represent my college on a  national scale.


    By  the end of the year the students were asked to fill out a survey about  their time at college. Student union approval ratings were previously  laying around 30%, with about 5 questions about the student’s union. By  the time I finished, it laid around 90% with comments from students  saying about how amazing it was for their problems to be fixed so  easily.


    On  top of this, I received a letter from the Chief Executive President of  Student Welfare saying that I was the best Student Union’s Officer ever  and rewarding me with a £50 Amazon voucher.
"

Talk about your achievements, talk about the statistics that back these achievements up. But make sure it’s in a story, humans really like stories.

10. What did you like and dislike about your last job?

When answering this question, you want to balance two things. On one hand, you don't want to sound like a moaner who hated your last job. But you also want to be authentic. Since it's easy to talk about what you liked about yout last job, we'll discuss how to talk about the negatives here.

The interviewer is asking you to say something negative about your last job. Don't pretend there wasn't anything negative, everyone doesn't like something about their job. Even if it's really small, be authentic and you'll do fine.

Don't discuss people. This will make you come off as cruel or bad of heart. Discuss the circumstances or tasks you had.

Here's a good answer you can model your own answer on:


    I  must say that I loved many things about my previous job: amazing people  and an environment where I was challenged at every turn. However- there  was one thing I didn’t like: expectations sometimes were unclear. I  would be assigned a project with loose guidelines and turn it in on time  to specifications. I’d then be told I did the project wrong. I’ve since  learned to communicate better- to ask my supervisor if I have  questions- and I’ve learned to never assume. Two people can look at  project guidelines and draw vastly different interpretations of what is  to be done. I’ll always be thankful for that learning experience and for  the great folks at the company.

This answer is good. It talks about a negative in your job and how you overcame it. The employer is trying to trick you up, by seeing if there is something negative about you. Give them what they want, but talk about how you turned this negative into a positive. 


11. Tell me about a time you worked in a team

You’re very likely going to work in a team, so the interviewer wants to know how good you are at team work.

You need to talk about an experience and weave it into a story. You need to talk about what you did, the problems your team overcame. Don't badmouth your team, only talk well about them. And remember, the interview cares about your team. There's no "i" in team, so don't only talk about how you did everything in the team. 

This is really personal and customised to you, so no examples from me here. You should really form your own answers.

12. What do your coworkers say about you?

If you have testimonials or refernece letters, now is a good time to ask if you can show them.  Never just pull out your phone or paper documents without asking if it's okay.

If you don't have testimonials, you need to talk about yourself from an outside perspective. An answer like this would work:

"
   My  colleagues have told me that I am extremely organized and excellent at  time management. During one project, my team members praised me for  developing and sticking to a timeline for all the phases of the project.  (Give a brief summary of what the project was.) We ended up  successfully completing it ahead of time, and it was a hit
"

Notice how we talked about a time in a team, and how we used a story to tell it. This is extremely effective.

13. How do you deal with stress and failure?

Don’t  pretend like you’ve never experienced stress. Talk about how you deal  with stress and failure. This is highly personal so again customise this  to you. My answer would be:


    I  once was rejected by 5 universties. I had no idea what I would be doing  come September. This was a highly stressful time for me because I  expected to get into at least one university. I went running, I took a  few days off work and I decided on my options. I could either of been  sad, moany and upset for the rest of that month or I could of manned up,  accecpted what had happened and decided on my next step. I chose the  latter.




14. How much money do you want?

Quincy Larson has a good article on this here:
Salary Negotiation: how not to set a bunch of money on fire Pop quiz, hot shot.medium.freecodecamp.org
If the salary is given in the job description, don’t try to negoiate it.
Questions  on salary are difficult. Once you give a number, you lose. They know  that’s your maximum, so don’t try and be the first one to give a number.  The interviewer might ask:
“What’s your current salary?”
Which is just a trick to find out how much money you’re okay with.
You should avoid these questions, don’t give them any numbers. If they ask one of these simply say:


    I’m not comfortable sharing that information at this point


Here’s a good quote relating to this subject:


    "At  some point in the process you achieve something which I describe as  “Yes, if…” rather than “No, but…”. “Yes, we want to work with you, if we  can come to a mutually satisfactory offer,” which is distinguished  from, “No, we don’t want to work with you, but we might work with you if  it turns out that you’re disgustingly cheap.” After you have agreement  in principle that, “We want you to work here. What’ll it take to make  that happen?” — then and only then do you start talking about  money." — Patrick McKenzie


Quincy  suggests that switching this salary neogiation over to email is good.  You have time to think about what’s being said and time to reply. You  also have concrete proof of a salary in the emails.
Once the employer asks something like “but we have to negoiate salary at some point” just say “can you email me at all?”.
It  never hurts to negoiate, statistics show that 87% of companies won’t  pull a job offer if a candiate neogiates their salary (Why You? — James  Reed).

You  need to prepare for this question. You need to research what other  employees are earning at this company. And what people with the same job title but at different companies are earning. You can use Google,  Glassdoor, Payscale to find this information. The location of the job  matters too and will effect salary.
Have  3 numbers in your head. The perfect amount which is the highest amount  possible for this job. The lowest amount, at which point you may as well  walk away from the job offer and the medium amount, which is the middle  of the 2.
If  the company offers you stock options, don’t play around with that.  Nothing beats cold hard salary. It’s very unlikely the company you work  at is going to be the next Facebook. In some cases stock options are  worth more than cash but normally this is not true.
When  you get to the point of emailing the employer, ask “what do you think  I’m wroth?” or “How much were you thinking?”. The first person to give a  solid number loses. You know how in Pawn Stars they always haggle down?  That’s because the seller always gives the price first. They know  that’s their maximum, so they try to save themselves money.

Once you give a number the employer will do exactly the same. They’ll haggle down.

If  your maximum salary number is £100k, and they offer you £100k I  wouldn’t try to bargain. Unless you’re absolutely amazing, some kind of  super human who’s absolutely worth more than the maximum salary in the  industry I wouldn’t do it. But then again, 87% of companies won’t pull a  job offer because of negoiation so you can try anyway.

However  in the real world this probably isn’t going to happen. They’ll likely  offer you £50k or half of your highest maximum salary number. This is  where you can haggle up. They’re allowed to haggle you down, so why  don’t you haggle up?
Here’s a story of a guy who negoiated and got a compenstation package worth £250k.
Farewell, App Academy. Hello, Airbnb. (Part I) A couple weeks ago I had my last day as Director of Product at App Academy. This coming Monday, I will be starting work…haseebq.com
In busines school you learn to pit sellers against each other.
“Yes,  I really love this car but this store down the road is offering it to  me 10% cheaper. I really like this store, is there anyway you can offer  it to me cheaper?”

15. Show me your creativity
This question can come out in many forms, but they all reference creativity.
Almost all employers look for creativity.
Creativity does not have to be you painting a picture or creating a sculpture.
You might decide to create a Google Sheets document so everyone on your course knows all the deadline dates for course work.
As  with all interview questions it’s important to provide examples here  and I can’t tell you what examples to include as I don’t know you.
Here’s a good answer from here:


    While  working at SalesCompany, I developed a lead generalization email that  generated an unheard of 37% response rate — well above the previous  record of 12%, using a friendly tone that made the email prepare casual  and personally written, despite being a template.


Change “uhhhh” to “ “

Instead of saying “uhhhh” and “ehhhhhh” just pause. Smile.


Ask for a pause

In  Karate we have something called a Kata, which is like a dance of all  the moves you’re supposed to know at your level. It’s perfectly okay  that between moves you take a  short pause, a little break to think about what your next move is but  when you perform the next move you do it strongly and fast.
The same can be said for interviews. It’s perfectly okay to say


    Sorry, I’m feeling a little nervous. Do you mind if I have a few seconds to myself so I can calm down?


The  interviewer knows your nervous. The difference here is that you’ve  recognised this and you’ve done something to try to mitigate it. Most  people who are interviewed are nervous and they never stop being  nervous. They just talk and talk and talk and rush through everything.
In  Karate if you rushed through your Kata it would be extremely ugly and  convoluted. The same holds for interviews. Do not rush through  questions. Don’t even worry about a time limit. If you’re calm and  careful the interviewer will keep track of time. 